=== Page 1 ===
LEGAL 
WRITING 
~ 
I N 3/-IMM-
PLAIN 
ENGLISH 
'1f llil IT m II) JI II) JI '1f TI ct) JM

=== Page 2 ===
LEGAL WRITING IN PLAIN ENGLISH

=== Page 3 ===
Permissions, A Survival Guide
Susan M. Bielstein
The Craft of Research
Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, Joseph M. Williams, Joseph Bizup,  
and William T. FitzGerald
The Chicago Guide to Fact- Checking
Brooke Borel
The Chicago Guide to Grammar, Usage, and Punctuation
Bryan A. Garner
Getting It Published
William Germano
On Revision
William Germano
What Editors Do
Peter Ginna, editor
Writing Science in Plain English
Anne E. Greene
Storycraft
Jack Hart
Wordcraft
Jack Hart
Cite Right
Charles Lipson
Economical Writing
Deirdre Nansen McCloskey
The Chicago Guide to Writing about Numbers
Jane E. Miller
A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations
Kate L. Turabian
A complete list of series titles is available on the University of Chicago Press website.
8.f-2~ 
ui 
• Ir~ 
1 ➔-
00 5' ft 
~~

=== Page 4 ===
LEGAL 
WRITING  
IN  
PLAIN 
ENGLISH
A Text with Exercises
t h i r d e d i t i o n
bryan a. garner
the university of chicago press
Chicago and London

=== Page 5 ===
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2001, 2013, 2023 by Bryan A. Garner
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever 
without written permission, except in the case of brief quotations in critical articles and reviews. For 
more information, contact the University of Chicago Press, 1427 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637.
Published 2023
Printed in the United States of America
32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23  1 2 3 4 5
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 81654- 8 (paper)
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 81655- 5 (e- book)
DOI: https:// doi .org /10 .7208 /chicago /9780226816555 .001 .0001
Library of Congress  Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Names: Garner, Bryan A., author.
Title: Legal writing in plain English : a text with exercises / Bryan A. Garner.
Other titles: Chicago guides to writing, editing, and publishing.
Description: Third edition. | Chicago : The University of Chicago Press, 2023. | Series: Chicago 
guides to writing, editing, and publishing | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022053761 | ISBN 9780226816548 (paperback) | ISBN 9780226816555 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Legal composition.
Classification: LCC KF250 .G373 2023 | DDC 808.06/634—dc23/eng/20230403
LC record available at https:// lccn .loc .gov /2022053761
♾ This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48- 1992 (Permanence of Paper).

=== Page 6 ===
For my beloved daughter
alexandra bess

=== Page 7 ===


=== Page 8 ===
other books written or edited by bryan a. garner
Garner’s Modern English Usage
Garner’s Dictionary of Legal Usage
Black’s Law Dictionary (all editions since 1996)
The Redbook: A Manual on Legal Style
The Elements of Legal Style
Garner on Language and Writing (foreword by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg)
Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts (with Justice Antonin Scalia)
Making Your Case: The Art of Persuading Judges (with Justice Antonin Scalia)
The Law of Judicial Precedent (with 12 judicial coauthors) (foreword by Justice Stephen 
Breyer)
The Chicago Manual of Style, chap. 5, “Grammar and Usage” (since the 15th edition)
The Chicago Guide to Grammar, Usage, and Punctuation
The Winning Brief: 100 Tips for Persuasive Briefing in Trial and Appellate Courts
The Winning Oral Argument
Ethical Communications for Lawyers
Securities Disclosure in Plain English
Guidelines for Drafting and Editing Court Rules
Guidelines for Drafting and Editing Legislation
Garner’s Guidelines for Drafting and Editing Contracts
Garner’s Coursebook on Drafting and Editing Contracts
A New Miscellany- at- Law by Sir Robert Megarry
The Oxford Dictionary of American Usage and Style
The Rules of Golf in Plain English (with Jeffrey Kuhn)
The HBR Guide to Better Business Writing
A Handbook of Basic Legal Terms
A Handbook of Business Law Terms
A Handbook of Criminal Law Terms
A Handbook of Family Law Terms
Nino and Me: An Intimate Portrait of Scalia’s Last Ten Years
Quack This Way: David Foster Wallace and Bryan A. Garner Talk Language and Writing
Texas, Our Texas: Remembrances of the University
Taming the Tongue in the Heyday of English Grammar (1711– 1851)

=== Page 9 ===


=== Page 10 ===
CONTENTS
 
Preface xiii
 
Introduction 1
part one: Principles for All Legal Writing 5
1. Framing Your Thoughts 7
 
§ 1. 
Have something to say, and think it through. Approach your task with a 
fervent desire to get your message across. 7
 
§ 2. 
Carry out your writing projects in four steps: think and research; plan and 
organize; write; revise. 11
 
§ 3. 
Order your material in a logical sequence. Present facts chronologically. 
For other material, make the order (a) deductive, (b) comparative, or  
(c) spatial. Keep related material together. 19
 
§ 4. 
Use informative headings to mark sections and, if helpful,  
subsections. 25
2. Phrasing Your Sentences 32
 
§ 5. 
Exclude unnecessary words. 32
 
§ 6. 
Keep your average sentence length to about 20 words. 36
 
§ 7. 
Keep the subject, the verb, and the object together— toward the beginning 
of the sentence. 41
 
§ 8. 
Use parallel phrasing for parallel ideas: don’t pair unlike grammatical 
forms. 44
 
§ 9. 
Use strong, precise verbs. Minimize is, are, was, and were— especially when 
they are part of a passive- voice construction. 51
 
§ 10. Avoid multiple negatives. 57
 
§ 11. End sentences emphatically. 59
3. Choosing Your Words 62
 
§ 12. Use plain English, not legalese. 62
 
§ 13. Be wary of pretension, officialese, and stiff formulas. 69
 
§ 14. Simplify wordy phrases— especially those containing of. 74
 
§ 15. Avoid zombie nouns— especially - ion words that you can turn into 
verbs. 78

=== Page 11 ===
x 
contents
 
§ 16. Avoid doublets and triplets. 81
 
§ 17. Refer to people and companies by name. Never use corresponding terms 
ending in - or and - ee. 84
 
§ 18. Use shorthand names only when you must. Shun unfamiliar 
acronyms. 87
 
§ 19. Make it snappy, vivid, and interesting. 90
 
§ 20. Be a companionable voice of reason. Make everything you write 
speakable. 93
part two: Principles Mainly for Analytical and 
Persuasive Writing 99
 
§ 21. Plan all three parts: the beginning, the middle, and the end. 101
 
§ 22. For the all- important opener, use the deep issue to state the problem 
clearly. 110
 
§ 23. Summarize concretely and effectively. But don’t overparticularize with 
dates and similar unimportant details. 118
 
§ 24. Make your paragraphs cohesive. Introduce each one with a topic 
sentence. 122
 
§ 25. Link your paragraphs explicitly. 125
 
§ 26. Vary the length of your paragraphs, but keep them generally short. 133
 
§ 27. Provide textual signposts along the way. 137
 
§ 28. Unclutter the text by footnoting citations. Keep the footnotes free of 
sentences. 140
 
§ 29. Weave quotations deftly into your prose. “Quotation sandwiches” are hard 
to skip. 151
 
§ 30. Be forthright in dealing with counterarguments. 157
part three: Principles Mainly for Legal Drafting 161
 
§ 31. Draft for an ordinary reader, not for a mythical judge who might someday 
review the document. 163
 
§ 32. Organize provisions in descending order of importance. Use a good 
numbering system and abundant headings to make things easy to 
find. 166
 
§ 33. Minimize definitions and cross- references. If you have more than a few 
definitions, put them in a schedule at the end, not at the beginning. 171
 
§ 34. Break down enumerations into parallel provisions. Put every list of 
subparts at the end of the sentence— never at the beginning or in the 
middle. 175
 
§ 35. Replace every shall. 181
 
§ 36. Don’t use provisos. 191
 
§ 37. Replace and/or wherever it appears. 197
 
§ 38. Prefer the singular over the plural. 199

=== Page 12 ===
contents 
xi
 
§ 39. Use numerals, not words, to denote amounts. Avoid word– numeral 
doublets. 201
 
§ 40. If you don’t understand a form provision— or why it should be included in 
your document— try diligently to gain that understanding. If you still can’t 
understand it, cut it. 205
part four: Principles for Document Design 209
 
§ 41. Make sensible choices about typography: use a readable font and type 
size, don’t underline, minimize all- caps and initial caps, and put one space 
between sentences. 211
 
§ 42. Create ample white space— and use it meaningfully. 214
 
§ 43. Highlight ideas with attention- getters such as bullets. 216
 
§ 44. Use graphics whenever they can enhance your message. 218
 
§ 45. For a long document, make a table of contents. 224
part five: Methods for Continued Improvement 233
 
§ 46. Embrace constructive criticism. 235
 
§ 47. Edit your work rigorously and systematically. 237
 
§ 48. Seek out reliable answers to questions of grammar and usage. 240
 
§ 49. Habitually gauge your own readerly likes and dislikes, as well as those of 
other readers. 244
 
§ 50. Remember that good writing makes the reader’s job easy; bad writing 
makes it hard. 247
 
Appendix A: A Restatement of Punctuation 249
 
Appendix B: Four Model Documents 273
 
1. 
Research Memos 275
 
2. 
Motions 287
 
3. 
Appellate Briefs 299
 
4. 
Contracts 317
 
Key to Basic Exercises 337
 
Bibliography 357
 
Index 361

=== Page 13 ===


=== Page 14 ===
xiii
PREFACE
This book takes a practical approach to legal writing. It derives from my ex-
perience over several decades working with law students and— in far greater 
numbers— practicing lawyers and judges. It is intended not just for law stu-
dents and paralegals but also for practitioners— including experienced ones. 
In devising the exercises for each section, I envisioned either a writing class 
or an informal group of legal writers who meet periodically to work through 
the book.
Particularly in its approach to exercises, the book differs markedly from 
other legal- writing texts. Each of the 50 sections contains a basic, an inter-
mediate, and an advanced exercise. (Model answers for many of the basic ex-
ercises are in the back of the book.) Some of these exercises are open- ended, 
requiring you to supply examples of writing that illustrates the problem the 
section addresses. This simply means that you’ll have to pay attention to other 
writers’ technique when you read. Other exercises require you to research the 
literature on effective writing. Why? Because as professional writers, lawyers 
should know this literature. After all, everyday questions about writing are 
generally much easier to answer than the legal questions that arise in law prac-
tice. If you worry about points of grammar and usage, see § 48. Better yet, 
make friends with the nearest librarian. Librarians are there to help you, and 
they’re generally eager to do it.
The book’s organization reflects the different types of writing that law-
yers do. Some techniques apply to virtually all types (see §§ 1– 20). Others ap-
ply mostly— though not exclusively— to analytical and persuasive writing (see 
§§ 21– 30). Still others apply mostly to transactional drafting (see §§ 31– 40). 
Then there are two other groupings of techniques: those that lead to readable 
typography (see §§ 41– 45) and those that lead to ongoing improvement (see 
§§ 46– 50).
Much of the advice in this book depends on— and even promotes— sound 
legal analysis. Many sections are essentially about thinking straight. This is 
crucial, since it’s impossible to separate good writing from clear thinking.
Here you’ll find discussed and illustrated the primary techniques for im-
proving your writing style. Some sections will serve as reminders of things

=== Page 15 ===
xiv 
preface
you’ve heard before but perhaps forgotten. Other techniques will probably be 
new to you. What matters most, in the end, is how you apply sound practices 
in your writing. You’ll have to use good judgment. No blackletter rule can 
substitute for that.
Finally, a word about “plain English.” The phrase shouldn’t connote drab 
and dreary language. Actually, plain English can be captivating. It’s robust and 
direct. You achieve plain English when you use the simplest, most straight-
forward way to express an idea. You can still choose interesting words. But 
you’ll avoid gaudy, pretentious ones that have everyday replacements meaning 
precisely the same thing.
I hope that you’ll enjoy and profit from the book. The examples are drawn 
from all practice areas, and the exercises are practical and realistic. If you can 
handle them capably, you’re quite a legal writer. If not, keep working. This 
book is meant to offer both help and hope.
☙☙☙
The more books I write, the more abettors I have. Among the indispensable 
contributors to this book are the participants in continuing- legal- education 
seminars— as well as law students— who have contributed to my knowledge 
of legal writing and legal language over more than 20 years. Although the 
group probably consists of several thousand people, it’s a select group among 
the some 250,000 lawyers and students who, in my seminars, have been ex-
posed to many of the principles discussed in these pages. To the lawyers and 
students whose comments gave insight and energy to this investigation, a gen-
uine thank- you.
Some debts are so specific that I must name names. Two English profes-
sors at the University of Texas— John R. Trimble and Betty Sue Flowers— 
have occasionally team- taught with me, and I’ve learned volumes from them. 
Trimble influenced my thinking especially in §§ 14, 20, 25, 29, and 50, and 
Flowers provided the intellectual framework for § 2.
I greatly benefited from the suggestions of several readers who acted as 
consultants for this and previous editions: Joel Atlas, Frances K. Browne, 
Kathleen Coles, A. Darby Dickerson, Elizabeth S. Duquette, Elana Einhorn, 
Molly Fergusson, Joe Fore, Robert Harrison, Wendy- Adele Humphrey, Kay 
Kavanagh, Joseph Kimble, Karen Larsen, Charles W. Oldfield, Kathleen 
O’Neill, David Raatz, Susannah Tobin, Kathryn Tullos, and Kathleen Vinson.
I’m indebted to Michael L. Atchley, Beverly Ray Burlingame, Dominic G. 
Castillo, Charles Dewey Cole Jr., Shareda Coleman, Tina G. Davis, Elise Fos-
ter, Lawrence Friedman, Maria Luisa Hernandez Juarez, Whitney Knox Lee, 
Michael A. Logan, Kenisha Marks, Erin Rodenhouse, E. Joshua Rosenkranz,

=== Page 16 ===
preface 
xv
Steven C. Seeger, Karen Sistrunk, and David W. West for the good models I’ve 
cited. They are splendid writers, and I am delighted to showcase their work.
I’ve had the help of many able editors. Linda J. Halvorson of the Univer-
sity of Chicago Press originally invited me to write the book and made many 
helpful suggestions, as did Mary Laur on the second and third editions. Many 
others contributed in myriad ways: my heartfelt thanks to Ryden McComas 
Anderson, David Bemelmans, Karolyne H.C. Garner, Tiger Jackson, Ryan 
Kemrite, Ilan Lavian, Karen Magnuson, Becky R. Moler, Jeff Newman, Eliz-
abeth C. Powell, Wanda Raiford, David W. Schultz, Joseph F. Spaniol Jr., and 
David J. Zheng.
I wrote the first edition in July and August of 1999 in Oxford, England, at 
the Bodleian Law Library. Many thanks to my generous friend Professor Tony 
Honoré, both for his electric wit (on any subject) and for his many kindnesses 
(including the extended use of his library carrel).
My wife, Karolyne, and my two daughters, Caroline and Alexandra, have 
been extraordinarily supportive. I believe they know how grateful I am.
Bryan A. Garner
Dallas, Texas

=== Page 17 ===


=== Page 18 ===
1
INTRODUCTION
“Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this document 
(or any part thereof). . . .” No. Strike that.
There’s an age- old cycle of poor legal writing. You can help break it.
Start with the premise that writing well isn’t easy. Most people don’t do 
it well— even many college graduates who think they do. Most doctors, ac-
countants, and businesspeople— even most professors— aren’t accomplished 
writers. Why should lawyers be any different?
When you plunge groups of mediocre writers into a complex field with its 
own mind- boggling jargon, rife with bloated expressions that displace every-
day words, the results are predictable enough. But it’s even worse: Make law 
students pore over reams of tedious, hyperformal, creaky prose. Acculturate 
them to pomposity. Then what do you suppose you’ll get? You’ll end up with 
average legal writers, whose work is wordy, stuffy, artificial, often ungrammat-
ical, and largely unreadable.
Each generation trains the next, steeping students and junior colleagues in 
stale forms and jargon; underlying the churn is the premise that writing well is 
not to be expected (perhaps even suspect).
It doesn’t have to be this way— for you or anybody else. Even if you’re 
entering the legal profession as a fairly weak writer, you can help break the 
cycle. You don’t have to blindly adopt the worn- out, ineffective writing habits 
of the past.
Once you become a skillful writer— especially a skillful writer on legal 
subjects— your rewards will be great. But before we talk about rewards, let’s 
ponder some obstacles you must overcome.
First, though anyone can learn to write effectively, it takes hard work. 
Good style is something you must strive to attain. In that way it’s like a sport: 
there are relatively few really good players, and they don’t reach that level of 
competence through inertia. They work at it. So remember: writing is like any 
other skill— you can improve, but you’ll have to dedicate yourself to it. The 
easier path is to settle for being a so- so writer.
If you want to become a first- rate writer, you’ll have to make a com-
mitment.

=== Page 19 ===
2 
introduction
Second, since you’re in law, you’re already swimming in a sea of bad writ-
ing. We learn our trade by struggling through oceans of dreck— legal prose 
that seems designed to stifle any flair for language. When on the job, we read 
poor prose almost exclusively. It’s wordy, heavy, and antique- sounding. A part 
of you may well come to believe that you must sound that way to be truly law-
yerlike.
You’ll have to inoculate yourself against legalese.
Third, the world is complex, and so is the law. You might think that good 
legal writing is necessarily complex. You might even be tempted to make your 
writing more complex than necessary just to impress. You’ll feel the impulse 
to shun simplicity.
Of all the hurdles we’ve considered, this will be the hardest. You’ll have 
to embrace simplicity— while always resisting oversimplification. And that 
will require intelligence and maturity.
This brings us to the fourth and final point. You’ll have to be psycholog-
ically mature. It’s a prerequisite. Law school is a life- changing experience. 
When you’re through with it, you’re a different person— perhaps better, per-
haps not, but undeniably different. Ultimately, you’ll have to answer a ques-
tion that your parents started helping you answer before you understood a 
single word: What kind of person are you? And every time you write, you’ll 
be answering some related questions: What kind of person are you as a writer? 
What do you sound like?
If you want to write well, you’ll have to resist sounding like a machine— or 
a foreign philosopher in translation. You will have to learn to sound like your-
self. It’s even possible that you’ll find yourself by learning to write well.
Yet the rewards are more tangible than that. They’re by- products of good 
writing. Because legal employers prize writing ability more highly than almost 
any other skill, you’ll gain several immediate advantages:
• You’ll be more likely to get and keep whatever job you want.
• You’ll be more likely to be promoted quickly.
• You’ll have better opportunities for career mobility, with a broader 
range of possibilities.
If you can write— really write— people will assume certain other things about 
you. The most important is that you’re a clear thinker and communicator.
Even so, you’ll surely encounter some workplace obstacles. You’ll find 
that time pressures make writing and revising difficult. An employer may tell 
you that you’re being too clear in your writing— that you should learn to ob-
fuscate. Maybe the advice will be to leave a court paper vague so that the spe-
cific arguments can be fashioned orally before the judge— a seat- of- the- pants 
approach. Maybe you’ll be chastised for departing from some mind- numbing

=== Page 20 ===
introduction 
3
convention that ill- informed legal writers cling to, such as doubling up words 
and numerals. Good writers hear all this bad advice and much more. So how 
are you to deal with it?
The answer is twofold. First, do what you must in the short run. Don’t 
butt heads with someone who refuses to engage in an intelligent discussion 
about writing. If that person happens to be your supervisor, simply learn what 
you can from the situation— including respect for legitimate stylistic dif-
ferences or approaches. (The lessons may have more to do with the human 
 psyche than with good writing.) Second, don’t lose your critical sense; in-
stead, cultivate it. Think independently about why you consider some writing 
good and other writing bad.
In the end, you might learn to write in a bold, clear, powerful way. It will 
be a struggle for you— as it is for anyone. You’ll be combating both a natural 
human tendency to write poorly and unnatural pressure from colleagues to 
write poorly. But you’ll have struck a blow for yourself and for the law. You’ll 
be championing clarity and cogency— even truth. The law could stand to have 
those qualities in greater abundance.
But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. The journey toward clear thinking is 
only beginning.

=== Page 21 ===


=== Page 22 ===
part one
Principles for All Legal Writing
There are many types of legal documents— demand letters, opinion letters, 
research memos, motions, briefs, judicial opinions, contracts, statutes, and 
ordinances, to name a few. Although each type presents a unique set of chal-
lenges, some principles of good writing apply to the whole gamut. These 20 
principles make up Part One, which is divided into three subparts:
• Framing Your Thoughts
• Phrasing Your Sentences
• Choosing Your Words
Whatever the document, you’ll be doing those three things. The 20 tips that 
follow should help you do them better.

=== Page 23 ===


=== Page 24 ===
7
1
Framing Your Thoughts
§ 1. 
Have something to say, and think it through. Approach 
your task with a fervent desire to get your message 
across.
What’s your biggest challenge as a writer? It’s figuring out, from the mass of 
possibilities, exactly what your points are— and then stating them coherently, 
with adequate reasoning and support.
Although this advice might seem obvious, legal writers constantly ignore 
it. The result is a mushy, aimless style. Even with your point well in mind, if 
you take too long to reach it, you might as well have no point at all. Only read-
ers with a high incentive to understand you will labor to grasp your meaning.
That’s where law school comes in. Every law student must read and digest 
scads of diffuse writing. You read through old cases that take forever to convey 
fairly straightforward points. You read law- review articles that take 50 pages 
to say what might be said more powerfully in 5. Through it all, your incentive 
for gleaning the main message remains high because your grades depend on it.
Take, for example, a sentence from a judicial opinion. See if you can fol-
low the court’s point:
And in the outset we may as well be frank enough to confess, and, indeed, 
in view of the seriousness of the consequences which upon fuller reflec-
tion we find would inevitably result to municipalities in the matter of street 
improvements from the conclusion reached and announced in the former 
opinion, we are pleased to declare that the arguments upon rehearing have 
convinced us that the decision upon the ultimate question involved here 
formerly rendered by this court, even if not faulty in its reasoning from 
the premises announced or wholly erroneous in conclusions as to some of 
the questions incidentally arising and necessarily legitimate subjects of dis-
cussion in the decision of the main proposition, is, at any rate, one which 
may, under the peculiar circumstances of this case, the more justly and at 
the same time, upon reasons of equal cogency, be superseded by a conclu-
sion whose effect cannot be to disturb the integrity of the long and well- 
established system for the improvement of streets in the incorporated cities 
and towns of California not governed by freeholders’ charters.*
* Chase v. Kalber, 153 P. 397, 398 (Cal. Ct. App. 1915).

=== Page 25 ===
8 
part one: principles for all legal writing
What’s the court saying? In a highly embellished style, it says simply, “We 
made a mistake last time.” That’s all.
If you add sentence after sentence in this style— all filled with syntactic 
curlicues— you end up with an even more impenetrable morass of words. The 
only readers who will bother to decipher it are law students and lawyers paid 
to do so.
However willing you might be to pierce through another writer’s obscu-
rity, you must have empathy, insisting that your own writing never put your 
readers to that trouble. As a reader, then, you’ll need a penetrating mind to 
cut through overgrown verbal foliage. As a writer, you’ll need a focused mind 
to leave aside anything that doesn’t help you swiftly communicate your ideas. 
That’s the start to becoming an effective legal writer.
You must approach the task with communicative fervor— an intense de-
sire to have someone else understand what you’re saying. That’s key. If you 
don’t approach the task that way, real communication almost certainly won’t 
take place.
Always write with a particular reader in mind. Even when what you’re 
writing— say, an article or lawnote— is likely to have many different readers, 
choose one with whom you’re trying to connect. Ask yourself: How would 
you explain things to this specific person, step by step, in a rational order? You 
can imagine such a reader, to be sure, but it’s easy enough to pick someone you 
know. As you explain, imagine the questions your reader might ask, and an-
swer them as they might naturally arise if the reader were right there with you.
Even if you’re just taking notes, as in briefing a case you’ve just read, try 
to write prose that a friend could understand. Does that sound unrealistic? It 
shouldn’t. You see, every piece of writing is likely to have a secondary as well 
as a primary readership. Except perhaps with a diary or your own grocery list, 
you’re never writing just for yourself. So aim for general comprehensibility. This 
idea reinforces that of communicative fervor. Put the two together, and you have 
a winning combination for successful writing.
Let’s dwell for a moment on this idea of a secondary readership. When 
you’re on the job, you’re never writing just for your boss who has asked for 
a memo. Never. You’re also writing for your boss’s colleagues on the man-
agement committee. You’re writing for your boss two years from now, after 
the assignment has been long forgotten. You’re writing for your boss’s re-
placement (though at the time of writing you had no clue that might happen!). 
You’re writing for your boss’s boss. You’re writing for the client, probably 
a nonlawyer, who is paying for your analysis. You’re writing for all sorts of 
strangers to the actual assignment. They’ll be judging you: your critical think-
ing, your research skills, your expository abilities, your care and thoroughness,

